So previously we've talked about initialising
and setting primitive data type variables to literals.
But what happens if we try stuff a large value
in a small container where it doesn't fit?
Or if our small number is tossed into a large bucket?
So here we're going to talk about what happens
when there's a data type mismatch
either in size or in precision.
Narrowing is where you assign a larger
primitive data literal or variable to a smaller one.
Widening, on the other hand, is where you put
something small in a larger variable.
As you can imagine, the compiler is
more forgiving with widening attempts,
and actually has more constraints on narrowing.
So why not just use doubles and longs everywhere?
Well, you could, but you'd be eating up
as much as twice the memory unnecessarily,
which could be a problem in larger applications.
I've mentioned this previously,
but this is a good place to repeat it.
Firstly, every numeric value literal
that doesn't contain a decimal point
is a 32 bit int by default.
Secondly, every numeric literal with a decimal
is a double by default.
So let's first explore narrowing
with literals with some code.
We're going to continue in the same project,
primitive data we've been working on,
and we're gonna create a new class
called NarrowExample for main method.
And what I'm going to do, as always,
is paste some code in here,
and we're going to start looking at range,
some of our primitive data types,
using the wrapper functions min_value and max_value.
Right, so let's create that class, NarrowExample.
Okay, I'm gonna copy that code in.
You can see it's pretty basic code there.
It's showing the minimum and maximum values
for our various tops, and if we run this
you can see it's showing the range for various data types.
All right, so let's talk about assigning
literal int values to some primitive data variables
smaller than the 32 bit int.
These are the byte and the char and the short data types.
So I'm gonna add some code to their class
in the main method, okay.
So each literal here is really a 32 bit int,
but because the values in each case
are within the value range of the specific type
to which it's assigned, the compiler has no problems
with its assignment, and the values are said to be narrowed
to fit into the variables.
So the obvious question now is what happens
if the values exceed the range?
Well, let's actually add some code and see what happens.
So you can see we've now got three compiler errors.
In the case of the first ones,
looking for a byte and found an int.
So the compiler knows data will be lost
if these assignments were allowed,
and won't allow it without casting,
and we'll talk about casting a bit later.
For now, what I'll do is I'll just comment
those three lines out, to get rid of the errors.
Each numeric value literal that contains a decimal
is by default a double, and unlike integral conversions,
a narrowing conversion of a floating point number
always requires the casting operator.
Now we can see that if we add the following code
which I'm about to paste into our narrow example class,
so let's add some code.
So zero is obviously within the range for all types,
and yet not one of the lines compile, as you can see.
We've got an error from f over there,
required float, found double.
So this confirms that the value 0.0 is a double,
and a double is never implicitly narrowed.
Right, so again, I'll comment that out
to get rid of the compiler errors.
Right, so let's now move from narrowing examples
for literals to narrowing examples of other variables.
So let's add the following code.
You can see that I've created a variable
that's assigned the literal int 1,
which should fall into the ranges for byte, char and short.
So we should be able to assign this variable
to variables of byte, char, and short, right?
Well, as you can see, no, that's not the case.
The compiler doesn't allow it.
The compiler does not execute code so it will not know
that you've put a one in the variable,
and it doesn't allow the assignment for that reason.
So we'll do the same thing there,
we'll comment that out and move on.
All right, so that's narrowing.
Let's create a new class now, WideningExample,
and have a look at some widening techniques.
Okay, so widening is when you assign a smaller
primitive data literal or variable to a larger one.
In almost all cases, this could be done without casting.
And you can see some examples there,
we've got an exact literal type assignment for int,
myInt = 0, float, myFloat = 0.0f, and double, myDouble,
but widening with literals here,
you can see we've got long there, myLong = 0,
so that's widening an int to a long.
We've got myDouble = 0.0f,
well, that's widening a float literal to a double.
I've got some more comments here.
I've got myDouble = float = myLong
= myInt = myShort = mByte,
so since the assignments are right to left,
the value in mByte is widened to short
when assigned to myShort.
The value in myShort is widened to int
when assigned to myInt.
The value in myInt is widened to long
when assigned to myLong.
The value in myLong is widened to float
when assigned to myFloat,
and the value in myFloat is widened to double
when assigned to myDouble.
So your code prints a happy widening
and all is perfect, right?
Well, did you notice that we don't include
myChar in this assignment change?
So let's actually run this first.
So we've got our happy widening, so no errors,
but notice again I mentioned that myChar
isn't at the moment being used.
And we can confirm that myChar's never used.
So let's add this code to our main method
exploring the char conversions in more detail.
So I'm gonna put this code right down the bottom now,
paste in the code, all right.
So at the top, we've assigned a, a char a to myByte,
and the literal char is widened to int the narrow
to byte, so that's okay, but the flowing conversion
on line 46, 50 and 51, you've combined both widening
and narrowing primitive conversions.
So firstly the byte's converted to an int
by a widening primitive conversion,
and then the resulting int is converted to a char
by narrowing, so this doesn't work for variables.
The compiler doesn't have enough information
to determine if the narrowing's okay,
and if we have a look at the error,
required char, found byte.
Now a short and char are the same width,
but char is unsigned, so the conversion's not allowed.
You can see we've got similar over there,
required short, found char, and for myChar,
required char, found short.
Right, so let's just comment those lines out
so that our code still works.
All right, and we'll end the video here,
and in the next one, we're gonna start looking
and talking about casting.
See you in the next video.